The Project Gutenberg eBook of The overlord's thumb
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The overlord's thumb


Author: Robert Silverberg

Illustrator: Bill Bowman

Release date: October 20, 2023 [eBook #71918]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Royal Publications, Inc, 1957

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OVERLORD'S THUMB ***




                         The Overlord's Thumb

                         By ROBERT SILVERBERG

                      Illustrated by BILL BOWMAN

              His choice would govern a boy's fate--and,
                 incidentally, Earth's entire future.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                         Infinity March 1958.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The sun had gone down blood-red, and Colonel John Devall slept poorly
because of it. The atmosphere on Markin was not normally conducive to
blood-red sunsets, though they did happen occasionally on evenings
when the blue of sunlight was scattered particularly well. The Marks
connected red sunsets with approaching trouble. Colonel Devall, who
headed the Terran cultural and military mission to Markin, was more
cultural than military himself, and so was willing to accept the Markin
belief that the sunset was a premonition of conflict.

He was tall, well-made and erect in bearing, with the sharp bright eyes
and crisp manner of the military man. He successfully tried to project
an appearance of authoritative officerhood, and his men respected and
feared the image he showed them.

His degree was in anthropology. The military education was an
afterthought, but a shrewd one; it had brought him command of the
Markin outpost. The Department of Extraterrestrial Affairs insisted
that all missions to relatively primitive alien worlds be staffed and
headed by military men--and, Devall reasoned, so long as I keep up the
outward show, who's to know that I'm not the tough soldier they think I
am? Markin was a peaceful enough world. The natives were intelligent,
fairly highly advanced culturally if not technically, easily dealt with
on a rational being-to-being basis.

Which explains why Devall slept badly the night of the red sun. Despite
his elegant posture and comportment, he regarded himself essentially as
a bookish, un-military man. He had some doubts as to his own possible
behavior in an unforeseen time of crisis. The false front of his
officerhood might well crumble away under stress, and he knew it.

He dozed off, finally, toward morning, having kicked the covers to the
floor and twisted the sheets into crumpled confusion. It was a warmish
night--most of them were, on Markin--but he felt chilled.

He woke late, only a few minutes before officers' mess, and dressed
hurriedly in order to get there on time. As commanding officer, of
course, he had the privilege of sleeping as late as he pleased--but
getting up with the others was part of the task Devall imposed on
himself. He donned the light summer uniform, slapped depilator hastily
on his tanned face, hooked on his formal blaster and belt, and
signalled to his orderly that he was awake and ready.

The Terran enclave covered ten acres, half an hour's drive from one of
the largest Markin villages. An idling jeep waited outside Devall's
small private dome, and he climbed in, nodding curtly at the orderly.

"Morning, Harris."

"Good morning, sit. Sleep well?"

It was a ritual by now. "Very well," Devall responded automatically,
as the jeep's turbos thrummed once and sent the little car humming
across the compound to the mess hall. Clipped to the seat next to
Devall was his daily morning program-sheet, prepared for him by the
staffman-of-the-day while he slept. This morning's sheet was signed by
Dudley, a major of formidable efficiency--Space Service through and
through, a Military Wing career man and nothing else. Devall scanned
the assignments for the morning, neatly written out in Dudley's crabbed
hand.

_Kelly, Dorfman, Mellors, Steber on Linguistic Detail, as usual. Same
assignment as yesterday, in town._

_Haskell on medic duty. Blood samples; urinalysis._

_Matsuoko to maintenance staff (through Wednesday)._

_Jolli on zoo detail._

_Leonards, Meyer, Rodriguez on assigned botanical field trip, two days.
Extra jeep assigned for specimen collection._

Devall scanned the rest of the list, but, as expected, Dudley had done
a perfect job of deploying the men where they would be most useful and
most happy. Devall thought briefly about Leonards, on the botanical
field trip. A two-day trip might take them through the dangerous
rain-forest to the south; Devall felt a faint flicker of worry. The boy
was his nephew, his sister's son--a reasonably competent journeyman
botanist with the gold bar still untarnished on his shoulder. This was
the boy's first commission; he had been assigned to Devall's unit at
random, as a new man. Devall had concealed his relationship to Leonards
from the other men, knowing it might make things awkward for the boy,
but he still felt a protective urge.

_Hell, the kid can take care of himself_, Devall thought, and
scribbled his initials at the bottom of the sheet and clipped it back
in place; it would be posted while the men were cleaning their quarters
and the officers ate, and by 0900 everyone would be out on his day's
assignment. There was so much to do, Devall thought, and so little time
to do it. There were so many worlds--

He quitted the jeep and entered the mess hall. Officers' mess was a
small well-lit alcove to the left of the main hall; as Devall entered
he saw seven men standing stiffly at attention, waiting for him.

He knew they hadn't been standing that way all morning; they had
snapped to attention only when their lookout--probably Second
Lieutenant Leonards, the youngest--had warned them he was coming.

Well, he thought, it doesn't matter much. As long as appearance is
preserved. The form.

"Good morning, gentlemen," he said crisply, and took his place at the
head of the table.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a while, it looked as if it were going to turn out a pretty good
day. The sun rose in a cloudless sky, and the thermometer tacked to
the enclave flagstaff registered 93 degrees. When Markin got hot, it
got _hot_. By noon, Devall knew by now, they could expect something
like 110 in the shade--and then, a slow, steady decline into the low
eighties by midnight.

The botanical crew departed on time, rumbling out of camp in its two
jeeps, and Devall stood for a moment on the mess hall steps watching
them go, watching the other men head for their assigned posts.
Stubble-faced Sergeant Jolli saluted him as he trotted across the
compound to the zoo, where he would tend the little menagerie of Markin
wildlife the expedition would bring back to Earth at termination. Wiry
little Matsuoko passed by, dragging a carpenter's kit. The linguistic
team climbed into its jeep and drove off toward town, where they would
continue their studies in the Markin tongue.

They were all busy. The expedition had been on Markin just four
months; eight months was left of their time. Unless an extension of
stay came through, they'd pack up and return to Earth for six months
of furlough-cum-report-session, and then it would be on to some other
world for another year of residence.

Devall was not looking forward to leaving Markin. It was a pleasant
world, if a little on the hot side, and there was no way of knowing
what the _next_ world would be like. A frigid ball of frozen methane,
perhaps, where they would spend their year bundled into Valdez
breathing-suits and trying to make contact with some species of
intelligent ammonia-breathing molluscs. Better the devil we know,
Devall felt.

But he had to keep moving on. This was his eleventh world, and there
would be more to come. Earth had barely enough qualified survey teams
to cover ten thousand worlds half-adequately, and life abounded on
ten _million_. He would retain whichever members of the current team
satisfied him by their performance, replace those who didn't fit in,
and go off to his next job eight months from now.

He turned on the office fan and took down the logbook; unfastening the
binder, he slipped the first blank sheet into the autotype. For once he
avoided his standard blunder; he cleared his throat _before_ switching
on the autotype, thereby sparing the machine its customary difficulties
in finding a verbal equivalent for his _Br-ghhumph_!

The guidelight glowed a soft red. Devall said, "Fourth April,
two-seven-zero-five. Colonel John F. Devall recording. One hundred
nineteenth day of our stay on Markin, World 7 of System 1106-sub-a.

"Temperature, 93 at 0900; wind gentle, southerly--"

He went on at considerable length, as he did each morning. Finishing
off the required details, he gathered up the sheaf of specialty-reports
that had been left at his door the night before, and began to read
abstracts into the log; the autotype clattered merrily, and a machine
somewhere in the basement of the towering E-T Affairs Building in Rio
de Janeiro was reproducing his words as the subradio hookup transmitted
them.

It was dull work. Devall often wondered whether he might have been
ultimately happier doing simple anthropological field work, as he had
once done, instead of taking on the onerous burden of routine that an
administrative post entailed. _But someone has to shoulder the burden_,
he thought.

_Earthman's burden. We're the most advanced race; we help the others.
But no one twists our arms to come out to these worlds and share what
we have. Call it an inner compulsion._

He intended to work until noon; in the afternoon a Markin high priest
was coming to the enclave to see him, and the interview would probably
take almost till sundown. But about 1100 he was interrupted suddenly by
the sound of jeeps unexpectedly entering the compound, and he heard the
clamor of voices--both Terran voices and alien ones.

A fearful argument seemed to be in progress, but the group was too far
away and Devall's knowledge of Markin too uncertain for him to be able
to tell what was causing the rumpus. In some annoyance he snapped off
the autotype, rose from his chair, and peered through the window into
the yard.

Two jeeps had drawn up--the botanical crew, gone less than two hours.
Four natives surrounded the three Earthmen. Two of the natives clutched
barbed spears; a third was a woman, the fourth an old man. They were
all protesting hotly over something.

Devall scowled; from the pale, tense, unhappy faces of the men in the
jeep, he could tell something was very wrong. That blood-red sunset had
foretold accurately, he thought, as he dashed down the steps from his
study.

Seven pairs of eyes focussed on him as he strode toward the group:
eight glittering alien eyes, warmly golden, and six shifting, uneasy
Terran eyes.

"What's going on out here?" Devall demanded.

The aliens set up an immediate babble of noise, chattering away like a
quartet of squirrels. Devall had never seen any of them behaving this
way before.

"_Quiet!_" he roared.

In the silence that followed he said very softly, "Lieutenant Leonards,
can you tell me exactly what all this fuss is about?"

The boy looked very frightened; his jaws were stiffly clenched, his
lips bloodless. "Y-yes, sir," he said stammeringly. "Begging your
pardon, sir. I seem to have killed an alien."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the relative privacy of his office, Devall faced them all
again--Leonards, sitting very quietly staring at his gleaming boots;
Meyer and Rodriguez, who had accompanied him on the ill-starred
botanizing journey. The aliens were outside; there would be time to
calm them down later.

"Okay," Devall said. "Leonards, I want you to repeat the story, exactly
as you just told it to me, and I'll get it down on the autotype. Start
talking when I point to you."

He switched on the autotype and said, "Testimony of Second Lieutenant
Paul Leonards, Botanist, delivered in presence of commanding officer on
4 April 2705." He jabbed a forefinger at Leonards.

The boy's face looked waxy, beads of sweat dotted his pale vein-traced
forehead, and his blond hair was tangled and twisted. He clamped his
lips together in an agonized grimace, scratched the back of one hand,
and finally said, "Well, we left the enclave about 0900 this morning,
bound south and westerly on a tour of the out-lying regions. Our
purpose was to collect botanical specimens. I--was in charge of the
group, which also included Sergeants Meyer and Rodriguez."

He paused. "We--we accomplished little in the first half-hour; this
immediate area had already been thoroughly covered by us anyway. But
about 0945 Meyer noticed a heavily wooded area not far to the left of
the main road, and called it to my attention. I suggested we stop and
investigate. It was impossible to penetrate the wooded area in our
jeeps, so we proceeded on foot. I left Rodriguez to keep watch over our
gear while we were gone.

"We made our way through a close-packed stand of deciduous angiosperm
trees of a species we had already studied, and found ourselves in a
secluded area of natural growth, including several species which we
could see were previously uncatalogued. We found one in particular--a
shrub consisting of a single thick succulent green stalk perhaps four
feet high, topped by a huge gold and green composite flower head. We
filmed it in detail, took scent samples, pollen prints, and removed
several leaves."

Devall broke in suddenly. "You didn't pick the flower itself? Devall
speaking."

"Of course not. It was the only specimen in the vicinity, and it's not
our practice to destroy single specimens for the sake of collecting.
But I did remove several leaves from the stalk. And the moment I did
that, a native sprang at me from behind a thick clump of ferns.

"He was armed with one of those notched spears. Meyer saw him first
and yelled, and I jumped back just as the alien came charging forward
with his spear. I managed to deflect the spear with the outside of
my arm and was not hurt. The alien fell back a few feet and shouted
something at me in his language, which I don't understand too well as
yet. Then he raised his spear and menaced me with it. I was carrying
the standard-issue radial blaster. I drew it and ordered him in his own
language to lower his spear, that we meant no harm. He ignored me and
charged a second time. I fired in self-defense, trying to destroy the
spear or at worst wound his arm, but he spun round to take the full
force of the charge, and died instantly." Leonards shrugged. "That's
about it, sir. We came back here instantly."

"Umm. Devall speaking. Sergeant Meyer, would you say this account is
substantially true?"

Meyer was a thin-faced dark-haired man who was usually smiling, but he
wasn't smiling now. "This is Sergeant Meyer. I'd say that Lieutenant
Leonards told the story substantially as it occurred. Except that the
alien didn't seem overly fierce despite his actions, in my opinion.
I myself thought he was bluffing both times he charged, and I was a
little surprised when Lieutenant Leonards shot him. That's all, sir."

Frowning, the colonel said, "Devall speaking. This has been testimony
in the matter of the alien killed today by Lieutenant Leonards." He
snapped off the autotype, stood up, and leaned forward across the desk,
staring sternly at the trio of young botanists facing him. _These next
few days are going to be my test_, he thought tensely.

"Sergeant Rodriguez, since you weren't present at the actual incident
I'll consider you relieved of all responsibility in this matter,
and your testimony won't be required. Report to Major Dudley for
re-assignment for the remainder of the week."

"Thank you, sir." Rodriguez saluted, grinned gratefully, and was gone.

"As for you two, though," Devall said heavily, "you'll both have
to be confined to base pending the outcome of the affair. I don't
need to tell you how serious this can be, whether the killing was in
self-defense or not. Plenty of peoples don't understand the concept of
self-defense." He moistened his suddenly dry lips. "I don't anticipate
too many complications growing out of this. But these are alien people
on an alien world, and their behavior is never certain."

He glanced at Leonards. "Lieutenant, I'll have to ask for your own
safety that you remain in your quarters until further notice."

"Yes, sir. Is this to be considered arrest?"

"Not yet," Devall said. "Meyer, attach yourself to the maintenance
platoon for the remainder of the day. We'll probably need your
testimony again before this business is finished. Dismissed, both of
you."

When they were gone, Devall sank back limply in his webfoam chair and
stared at his fingertips. His hands were quivering as if they had a
life of their own.

_John F. Devall, Ph.D. Anthropology, Columbia '82, commissioned Space
Service Military Wing '87, and now you're in trouble for the first
time._

_How are you going to handle it, Jack?_ he asked himself. _Can you
prove that that silver eagle really belongs on your shoulder?_

He was sweating. He felt very tired. He shut his eyes for a moment,
opened them, and said into the intercom, "Send in the Marks."

       *       *       *       *       *

Five of them entered, made ceremonial bows, and ranged themselves
nervously along the far wall as if they were firing-squad candidates.
Accompanying them came Steber of the linguistics team, hastily recalled
from town to serve as an interpreter for Devall. The colonel's
knowledge of Markin was adequate but sketchy; he wanted Steber around
in case any fine points had to be dealt with in detail.

The Marks were humanoid in structure, simian in ancestry, which should
have made them close kin to the Terrans in general physiological
structure. They weren't. Their skin was a rough, coarse, pebble-grained
affair, dark-toned, running to muddy browns and occasional deep
purples. Their jaws had somehow acquired a reptilian hinge in the
course of evolution, which left them practically chinless but capable
of swallowing food in huge lumps that would strangle an Earthman. Their
eyes, liquid gold in color, were set wide on their heads, allowing
enormous peripheral vision; their noses were flat buttons, in some
cases barely perceptible.

Devall saw two younger men, obviously warriors; they had left their
weapons outside, but their jaws jutted belligerently and the darker of
the pair had virtually dislocated his jaw in rage. The woman looked
like all the Mark women, shapeless and weary behind her shabby cloak of
furs. The remaining pair were priests, one old, one _very_ old. It was
this ancient to whom Devall addressed his first remarks.

"I'm sorry that our meeting this afternoon has to be one of sorrow.
I had been looking forward to a pleasant talk. But it's not always
possible to predict what lies ahead."

"Death lay ahead for him who was killed," the old priest said in the
dry, high-pitched tone of voice that Devall knew implied anger and
scorn.

The woman let out a sudden wild ululation, half a dozen wailing words
jammed together so rapidly Devall could not translate them. "What did
she say?" he asked Steber.

The interpreter flattened his palms together thoughtfully. "She's the
woman of the man who was killed. She was--demanding revenge," he said
in English.

Apparently the two young warriors were friends of the dead man.
Devall's eyes scanned the five hostile alien faces. "This is a highly
regrettable incident," he said in Markin. "But I trust it won't affect
the warm relationship between Earthman and Markin that has prevailed so
far. This misunderstanding--"

"Blood must be atoned," said the smaller and less impressively garbed
of the two priests. He was probably the local priest, Devall thought,
and he was probably happy to have his superior on hand to back him up.

The colonel flicked sweat from his forehead. "The young man who
committed the act will certainly be disciplined. Of course you realize
that a killing in self-defense cannot be regarded as murder, but I
admit the young man did act unwisely and will suffer the consequences."
It didn't sound too satisfying to Devall, and, indeed, the aliens
hardly seemed impressed.

The high priest uttered two short, sharp syllables. They were not
words in Devall's vocabulary, and he looked over at Steber in appeal.

"He said Leonards was trespassing on sacred ground. He said the crime
they're angry about is not murder but blasphemy."

Despite the heat, Devall felt a sudden chill. _Not ... murder? This is
going to be complicated_, he realized gloomily.

To the priest he said, "Does this change the essential nature of the
case? He'll still be punished by us for his action, which can't be
condoned."

"You may punish him for murder, if you so choose," the high priest
said, speaking very slowly, so Devall would understand each word. The
widow emitted some highly terrestrial-sounding sobs; the young men
glowered stolidly. "Murder is not our concern," the high priest went
on. "He has taken life; life belongs to Them, and They withdraw it
whenever They see fit, by whatever means They care to employ. But he
has also desecrated a sacred flower on sacred ground. These are serious
crimes, to us. Added to this he has shed the blood of a Guardian,
on sacred ground. We ask you to turn him over to us for trial by a
priestly court on this double charge of blasphemy. Afterward, perhaps,
you may try him by your own laws, for whichever one of them he has
broken."

For an instant all Devall saw was the old priest's implacable leathery
face; then he turned and caught the expression of white-faced
astonishment and dismay Steber displayed.

It took several seconds for the high priest's words to sink in,
and several more before Devall came to stunned realization of the
implications. _They want to try an Earthman_, he thought numbly. _By
their own law. In their own court. And mete out their own punishment._

This had abruptly ceased being a mere local incident, an affair to
clean up, note in the log, and forget. It was no longer a matter of
simple reparations for the accidental killing of an alien.

Now, thought Devall dully, it was a matter of galactic importance. And
he was the man who had to make all the decisions.

       *       *       *       *       *

He visited Leonards that evening, after the meal. By that time everyone
in the camp knew what had happened, though Devall had ordered Steber to
keep quiet about the alien demand to try Leonards themselves.

The boy looked up as Devall entered his room, and managed a soggy
salute.

"At ease, Lieutenant." Devall sat on the edge of Leonards' bed and
squinted up at him. "Son, you're in very hot water now."

"Sir, I--"

"I know. You didn't mean to pluck leaves off the sacred bramble-bush,
and you couldn't help shooting down the native who attacked you. And
if this business were as simple as all that, I'd reprimand you for
hotheadedness and let it go at that. But--"

"But what, sir?"

Devall scowled and forced himself to face the boy squarely. "But the
aliens want to try you themselves. They aren't so much concerned with
the murder as they are with your double act of blasphemy. That withered
old high priest wants to take you before an ecclesiastical court."

"You won't allow _that_, of course, will you, Colonel?" Leonards seemed
confident that such an unthinkable thing could never happen.

"I'm not so sure, Paul," Devall said quietly, deliberately using the
boy's first name.

"_What_, sir?"

"This is evidently something very serious you've committed. That high
priest is calling a priestly convocation to deal with you. They'll be
back here to get you tomorrow at noon, he said."

"But you wouldn't turn me over to them, sir! After all, I was on duty;
I had no knowledge of the offense I was committing. Why, it's none of
their business!"

"Make _them_ see that," Devall said flatly. "They're aliens. They don't
understand Terran legal codes. They don't _want_ to hear about our
laws; by theirs, you've blasphemed, and blasphemers must be punished.
This is a law-abiding race on Markin. They're an ethically advanced
society, regardless of the fact that they're not technologically
advanced. Ethically they're on the same plane we are."

Leonards looked terribly pale. "You'll turn me over to them?"

Devall shrugged. "I didn't say that. But look at it from my position.
I'm leader of a cultural and military mission. Our purpose is to live
among these people, learn their ways, guide them as much as we can
in our limited time here. We at least _try_ to make a pretense of
respecting their rights as individuals and as a species, you know.

"Well, now it's squarely on the line. Are we friends living among them
and helping them, or are we overlords grinding them under our thumbs?"

"Sir, I'd say that was an over-simplification," Leonards remarked
hesitantly.

"Maybe so. But the issue's clear enough. If we turn them down, it means
we're setting up a gulf of superiority between Earth and these aliens,
despite the big show we made about being brothers. And word will spread
to other planets. We try to sound like friends, but our actions in
the celebrated Leonards case reveal our true colors. We're arrogant,
imperialistic, patronizing, and--well, do you see?"

"So you're going to turn me over to them for trial, then," the boy said
quietly.

Devall shook his head. He felt old, very old, at fifty. "I don't know.
I haven't made up my mind yet. If I turn you over, it'll certainly set
a dangerous precedent. And if I don't--I'm not sure what will happen."
He shrugged. "I'm going to refer the case back to Earth. It isn't my
decision to make."

       *       *       *       *       *

But it _was_ his decision to make, he thought, as he left the boy's
quarters and headed stiff-legged toward the communications shack. He
was on the spot, and only he could judge the complex of factors that
controlled the case. Earth would almost certainly pass the buck back to
him.

He was grateful for one thing, though: at least Leonards hadn't made
an appeal to him on family grounds. That was cause for pride, and some
relief. The fact that the boy was his nephew was something he'd have to
blot rigorously from his mind until all this was over.

The signalman was busy in the back of the shack, bent over a crowded
worktable. Devall waited a moment, cleared his throat gently, and said,
"Mr. Rory?"

Rory turned. "Yes, Colonel?"

"Put through a subradio solido to Earth for me, immediately. To
Director Thornton at the E-T Department. And yell for me when you've
made contact."

It took twenty minutes for the subspace impulse to leap out across
the light-years and find a receiver on Earth, ten minutes more for it
to pass through the relay point and on to Rio. Devall returned to the
shack to find the lambent green solido field in tune and waiting for
him. He stepped through and discovered himself standing a few feet
before the desk of the E-T Department's head. Thornton's image was
sharp, but the desk seemed to waver at the edges. Solid non-organic
objects always came through poorly.

Quickly Devall reviewed the situation. Thornton sat patiently,
unmoving, till the end of it; hands knotted rigidly, lean face set, he
might have been a statue. Finally he commented, "Unpleasant business."

"Quite."

"The alien is returning tomorrow, you say? I'm afraid that doesn't give
us much time to hold a staff meeting and explore the problem, Colonel
Devall."

"I could probably delay him a few days."

Thornton's thin lips formed a tight bloodless line. After an instant
he said, "No. Take whatever action you deem necessary, Colonel. If
the psychological pattern of the race is such that unfortunate
consequences would result if you refused to allow them to try your man,
then you must certainly turn him over. If the step can be avoided, of
course, avoid it. The man must be punished in any case."

The director smiled bleakly. "You're one of our best men, Colonel. I'm
confident you'll arrive at an ultimately satisfactory resolution to
this incident."

"Thank you, sir," Devall said, in a dry, uncertain voice. He nodded and
stepped back out of field range. Thornton's image seemed to flicker;
Devall caught one last dismissing sentence, "Report back to me when the
matter is settled," and then the field died.

He stood alone in the shabby communications shack, blinking out the
sudden darkness that rolled in over him after the solidophone's intense
light, and after a moment began to pick his way over the heaps of
equipment and out into the compound.

It was as he had expected. Thornton was a good man, but he was a
civilian appointee, subject to government control. He disliked making
top-level decisions--particularly when a colonel a few hundred
light-years away could be pitchforked into making them for him.

_Well_, he thought, _at least I notified Earth. The rest of the affair
is in my hands._

Significantly, there was a red sunset again that night.

       *       *       *       *       *

He called a meeting of his top staff men for 0915 the following
morning. Work at the base had all but suspended; the linguistics team
was confined to the area, and Devall had ordered guards posted at all
exits. Violence could rise unexpectedly among even the most placid of
alien peoples; it was impossible to predict the moment when a racial
circuit-breaker would cease to function and fierce hatred burst forth.

They listened in silence to the tapes of Leonards' statements, Meyer's
comments, and the brief interview Devall had had with the five aliens.
Devall punched the cut-off stud and glanced rapidly round the table at
his men: two majors, a captain, and a quartet of lieutenants comprised
his high staff, and one of the lieutenants was confined to quarters.

"That's the picture. The old high priest is showing up here about noon
for my answer. I thought I'd toss the thing open for staff discussion
first."

Major Dudley asked for the floor.

He was a short, stocky man with dark flashing eyes, and on several
occasions in the past had been known to disagree violently with Devall
on matters of procedure. Devall had picked him for four successive
trips, despite this; the colonel believed in diversity of opinion, and
Dudley was a tremendously efficient organizer as well.

"Major?"

"Sir, it doesn't seem to me that there's any question of what action
to take. It's impossible to hand Leonards over to them for trial.
It's--un-Earthlike!"

Devall frowned. "Would you elaborate, Major?"

"Simple enough. We're the race who developed the
space-drive--therefore, we're the galaxy's most advanced race. I think
that goes without saying."

"It does not," Devall commented. "But go ahead."

Scowling, Dudley said, "Regardless of your opinion, _sir_--the aliens
we've encountered so far have all regarded us as their obvious
superiors. I don't think that can be denied--and I think it can only be
attributed to the fact that we _are_ their superiors. Well, if we give
up Leonards for trial, it cheapens our position. It makes us look weak,
spineless. We--"

"You're suggesting, then," Devall broke in, "that we hold the position
of overlords in the galaxy--and by yielding to our serfs, we may lose
all control over them. Is this your belief, Major?" Devall glared at
him.

Dudley met the colonel's angry gaze calmly. "Basically, yes. Dammit,
sir, I've tried to make you see this ever since the Hegath expedition.
We're not out here in the stars to collect butterflies and squirrels!
We--"

"Out of order," Devall snapped coldly. "This is a cultural mission as
well as a military, Major--and so long as I'm in command it remains
primarily cultural." He felt on the verge of losing his temper. He
glanced away from Dudley and said, "Major Grey, could I hear from you?"

Grey was the ship's astrogator; on land his functions were to supervise
stockade-construction and mapmaking. He was a wiry, unsmiling little
man with razor-like cheekbones and ruddy skin. "I feel we have to be
cautious, sir. Handing Leonards over would result in a tremendous loss
of Terran prestige."

"_Loss?_" Dudley burst in. "It would cripple us! We'd never be able to
hold our heads up honestly in the galaxy again if--"

Calmly Devall said, "Major Dudley, you've been ruled out of order.
Leave this meeting, Major. I'll discuss a downward revision of your
status with you later." Turning back to Grey without a further glance
at Dudley, he said, "You don't believe, Major, that such an action
would have a corresponding _favorable_ effect on our prestige in the
eyes of those worlds inclined to regard Earth uneasily?"

"That's an extremely difficult thing to determine, sir."

"Very well, then." Devall rose. "Pursuant to regulations, I've brought
this matter to the attention of authorities on Earth, and have also
offered it for open discussion among my officers. Thanks for your time,
gentlemen."

Captain Marechal said uncertainly, "Sir, won't there be any vote on our
intended course of action?"

Devall grinned coldly. "As commanding officer of this base, I'll take
the sole responsibility upon myself for the decision in this particular
matter. It may make things easier for all of us in the consequent event
of a court-martial inquiry."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the only way, he thought, as he waited tensely in his office for
the high priest to arrive. The officers seemed firmly set against any
conciliatory action, in the name of Terra's prestige. It was hardly
fair for him to make them take responsibility for a decision that might
be repugnant to them.

Too bad about Dudley, Devall mused. But insubordination of that sort
was insufferable; Dudley would have to be dropped from the unit on
their next trip out. If there is any next trip out for me, he added.

The intercom glowed gently. "Yes?"

"Alien delegation is here, sir," said the orderly.

"Don't send them in until I signal."

He strode to the window and looked out. The compound, at first glance,
seemed full of aliens. Actually there were only a dozen, he realized,
but they were clad in full panoply, bright red and harsh green robes,
carrying spears and ornamental swords. Half a dozen enlisted men were
watching them nervously from a distance, their hands ready to fly to
blasters instantly if necessary.

He weighed the choices one last time.

If he handed Leonards over, the temporary anger of the aliens would be
appeased--but perhaps at a long-range cost to Earth's prestige. Devall
had long regarded himself as an essentially weak man with a superb
instinct for camouflage--but would his yielding to the aliens imply to
the universe that all Earth was weak?

On the other hand, he thought, suppose he refused to release
Leonards to the aliens. Then he would be, in essence, bringing down
the overlord's thumb, letting the universe know that Earthmen were
responsible only to themselves and not to the peoples the worlds they
visited.

Either way, he realized, the standing of Earth in the galaxy's
estimation would suffer. One way, they would look like appeasing
weaklings; the other, like tyrants. He remembered a definition he had
once read: _melodrama is the conflict of right and wrong, tragedy the
conflict of right and right_. Both sides were right here. Whichever way
he turned, there would be difficulties.

And there was an additional factor: the boy. What if they executed him?
Family considerations seemed absurdly picayune at this moment, but
still, to hand his own nephew over for possible execution by an alien
people--

He took a deep breath, straightened his shoulders, sharpened the hard
gaze of his eyes. A glance at the mirror over the bookcase told him
he looked every inch the commanding officer; not a hint of the inner
conflict showed through.

He depressed the intercom stud. "Send in the high priest. Let the rest
of them wait outside."

       *       *       *       *       *

The priest looked impossibly tiny and wrinkled, a gnome of a man whose
skin was fantastically gullied and mazed by extreme age. He wore a
green turban over his hairless head--a mark of deep mourning, Devall
knew.

The little alien bowed low, extending his pipestem arms behind his
back at a sharp angle, indicating respect. When he straightened, his
head craned back sharply, his small round eyes peering directly into
Devall's.

"The jury has been selected; the trial is ready to begin. Where is the
boy?"

Devall wished fleetingly he could have had the services of an
interpreter for this last interview. But that was impossible; this was
something he had to face alone, without help.

"The accused man is in his quarters," Devall said slowly. "First I want
to ask some questions, old one."

"Ask."

"If I give you the boy to try, will there be any chance of his
receiving the death penalty?"

"It is conceivable."

Devall scowled. "Can't you be a little more definite than that?"

"How can we know the verdict before the trial takes place?"

"Let that pass," Devall said, seeing he would get no concrete reply.
"Where would you try him?"

"Not far from here."

"Could I be present at the trial?"

"No."

Devall had learned enough of Markin grammar by now to realize that
the form of the negative the priest had employed meant literally,
I-say-_no_-and-mean-what-I-say. Moistening his lips, he said, "Suppose
I should refuse to turn Lieutenant Leonards over to you for trial? How
could I expect you people to react?"

There was a long silence. Finally the old priest said, "Would you do
such a thing?"

"I'm speaking hypothetically." (Literally, the form was
I-speak-on-a-cloud.)

"It would be very bad. We would be unable to purify the sacred garden
for many months. Also--" he added a sentence of unfamiliar words.
Devall puzzled unsuccessfully over their meaning for nearly a minute.

"What does that mean?" he asked at length. "Phrase it in different
words."

"It is the name of a ritual. _I_ would have to stand trial in the
Earthman's place--and I would die," the priest said simply. "Then my
successor would ask you all to go away."

The office seemed very quiet; the only sounds Devall heard were the
harsh breathing of the old priest and the off-key chirruping of the
cricketlike insects that infested the grass-plot outside the window.

_Appeasement_, he wondered? _Or the overlord's thumb?_

Suddenly there seemed no doubt at all in his mind of what he should do,
and he wondered how he could have hesitated.

"I hear and respect your wishes, old one," he said, in a ritual formula
of renunciation Steber had taught him. "The boy is yours. But can I ask
a favor?"

"Ask."

"He didn't know he was offending your laws. He meant well; he's
sincerely sorry for what he did. He's in your hands, now--but I want
to ask mercy on his behalf. He had no way of knowing he was offending."

"This will be seen at the trial," the old priest said coldly. "If there
is to be mercy, mercy will be shown him. I make no promises."

"Very well," Devall said. He reached for a pad and scrawled an order
remanding Lieutenant Paul Leonards to the aliens for trial, and signed
it with his full name and title. "Here. Give this to the Earthman who
let you in. He'll see to it that the boy is turned over to you."

"You are wise," the priest said. He bowed elaborately and made for the
door.

"Just one moment," Devall said desperately, as the alien opened the
door. "Another question."

"Ask," the priest said.

"You told me you'd take his place if I refused to let you have him.
Well, how about another substitute? Suppose--"

"_You_ are not acceptable to us," the priest said as if reading
Devall's mind, and left.

Five minutes later the colonel glanced out his window and saw the
solemn procession of aliens passing through the exit-posts and out of
the compound. In their midst, unprotesting, was Leonards. He didn't
look back, and Devall was glad of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The colonel stared at the row of books a long time, the frayed spools
that had followed him around from world to world, from gray Danelon to
stormy Lurrin to bone-dry Korvel, and on to Hegath and M'Qualt and the
others, and now to warm blue-skied Markin. Shaking his head, he turned
away and dropped heavily into the foam cradle behind his desk.

He snapped on the autotype with a savage gesture and dictated a full
account of his actions, from the very start until his climactic
decision, and smiled bitterly. There would be a certain time-lag, but
before long the autotype facsimile machine in the E-T Department's
basement would start clacking, there in Rio, and Thornton would know
what Devall had done.

And Thornton would be stuck with it as Department policy henceforth.

Devall switched on the intercom and said, "I'm not to be disturbed
under any circumstances. If there's anything urgent, have it sent to
Major Grey; he's acting head of the base until I countermand. And if
any messages come from Earth let Grey have them too."

He wondered if they'd relieve him of his command immediately, or wait
until he got back to Earth. The latter, more likely; Thornton had some
subtlety, if not much. But there was certain to be an inquiry, and a
head would roll.

Devall shrugged and stretched back. _I did what was right_, he told
himself firmly. _That's the one thing I can be sure of._

_But I hope I don't ever have to face my sister again._

He dozed, after a while, eyes half-open and slipping rapidly closed.
Sleep came to him, and he welcomed it, for he was terribly tired.

He was awakened suddenly, by a loud outcry. A jubilant shout from a
dozen throats at once, splitting the afternoon calm. Devall felt a
moment's disorientation; then, awakening rapidly, he sprang to the
window and peered out.

A figure--alone and on foot--was coming through the open gateway. He
wore regulation uniform, but it was dripping wet, and torn in several
places. His blond hair was plastered to his scalp as if he had been
swimming; he looked fatigued.

Leonards.

The colonel was nearly halfway out the front door before he realized
that his uniform was in improper order. He forced himself back, tidied
his clothing, and with steely dignity strode out the door a second time.

Leonards stood surrounded by a smiling knot of men, enlisted men and
officers alike. The boy was grinning wearily.

"Attention!" Devall barked, and immediately the area fell silent. He
stepped forward.

Leonards raised one arm in an exhausted salute. There were some ugly
bruises on him.

"I'm back, Colonel."

"I'm aware of that. You understand that I'll have to return you to the
Marks for trial anyway, despite your no doubt daring escape?"

The boy smiled and shook his head. "No, sir. You don't follow, sir. The
trial's over. I've been tried and acquitted."

"What's that?"

"It was trial by ordeal, Colonel. They prayed for half an hour or so,
and then they dumped me in the lake down the road. The dead man's two
brothers came after me and tried to drown me, but I outswam them and
came up safely on the other side."

He shook his hair like a drenched cat, scattering a spray of water
several feet in the air. "They nearly had me, once. But as soon as I
got across the lake alive and undrowned, it proved to them I couldn't
have meant any harm. So they declared me innocent, apologized, and
turned me loose. They were still praying when I left them."

There seemed to be no bitterness in Leonards' attitude; apparently,
Devall thought, he had understood the reason for the decision to hand
him over, and would not hold it against him now. That was gratifying.

"You'd better get to your quarters and dry off, Lieutenant. And then
come to my office. I'd like to talk to you there."

"Yes, sir."

Devall spun sharply and headed back across the clearing to his office.
He slammed the door behind him and switched on the autotype. The report
to Earth would have to be amended now.

A moment or two after he had finished, the intercom glowed. He turned
it on and heard Steber's voice saying, "Sir, the old priest is here.
He wants to apologize to you for everything. He's wearing clothing of
celebration, and he brought a peace-offering for us."

"Tell him I'll be right out," Devall said. "And call all the men
together. Including Dudley. _Especially_ Dudley. I want him to see
this."

He slipped off his sweat-stained jacket and took a new one out.
Surveying himself in the mirror, he nodded approvingly.

_Well, well_, he thought. _So the boy came through it safely. That's
good._

But he knew that the fate of Paul Leonards had been irrelevant all
along, except on the sheerly personal level. It was the larger issue
that counted.

For the first time, Earth had made a concrete demonstration of the
equality-of-intelligent-life doctrine it had been preaching so long.
He had shown that he respected the Markin laws in terms of what they
were _to the Marks_, and he had won the affection of a race as a
result. Having the boy return unharmed was a bonus.

But the precedent had been set. And the next time, perhaps, on some
other world, the outcome might not be so pleasant. Some cultures had
pretty nasty ways of putting criminals to death.

He realized that the burden the Earth exploration teams carried now had
become many times heavier--that now, Earthmen would be subject to the
laws of the planets who hosted them, and no more unwitting botanical
excursions into sacred gardens could be tolerated. But it was for the
ultimate good, he thought. We've shown them that we're not overlords,
and that most of us don't want to be overlords. And now the thumb comes
down on _us_.

He opened the door and stepped out. The men had gathered, and the old
priest knelt abjectly at the foot of the steps, bearing some sort of
enamelled box as his offering. Devall smiled and returned the bow, and
lifted the old alien gently to his feet.

_We'll have to be on our best behavior from now on_, he thought. _We'll
really have to watch our steps. But it'll be worth it._




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OVERLORD'S THUMB ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


